# Market-State-Sentiment-Lead

## Overview
Uses a collection of macroeconomic variables to infer latent (hidden) macro states/regimes at given points in time using a Hidden Markov Model. Each state is then manually labelled using the mean values for each variable for each state (e.g. - a state with an upward yield curve, steady/target inflation, low volatility, high economic activity, tightening labour market would be labelled as 'steady expansion' or 'goldilocks'). Separately, historical news headlines are ingested and an LLM is used to classify the prevailing sentiment over time. Lead-lag analysis is then conducted to determine if the sentiment change preceded the corresponding regime shift, and by how much.

## Economic variables
**Volatility Index** (YFinance, VIX) - the most popular measure of the stock market's expected volatility on S&P 500 options. The most important variable, acting as a 'fear gauge', often being the first indicator to move after geopolitical tension or liquidity traps etc, certainly reacting before the data below.

**Initial Jobless Claims (US)** (FRED API, ICSA) - a weekly count of claims filed on the separation of an individual from an employer, for unemployment insurance. Rising count indicates weakening labour market, a declining economic health. NOTE - originally considered ISM services PMI, though data is not freely available, and is unrealised/sentimental in nature, where jobless claim count is a hard outcome.

**US Yearly CPI inflation** (FRED API, CPIAUCSL) - measures the inflation rate of the US basket of goods, obvious choice for determining market states (high inflation, tightening economy, falling risk appetite etc.)

**US 2year/10year spread** (FRED API, DGS2 and DGS10 difference) - the difference in yields of 2 and 10 year US treasuries. A positive difference would suggest steady future growth, with longer bonds costing more. A negative difference usually precedes a recession as markets predict falling long term interest rates. The spread is therefore more useful than the actual yields themselves in this case.

## Processing the variables
The volatility index is a daily metric so will require no processing, whereas, CPI and Jobless Claims are monthly and weekly measures respectively, so will need forward filling to daily frequency; this is done from release date not strictly at the start of each month/week to avoid lookahead bias (e.g. January CPI data is released mid Feb, so the January data only enters from this point onwards). The yield spread requires the daily collection of yields, so the difference can be calculated; forward filling not necessary here.

Then all data is normalised using a rolling z-score. For each day the mean and standard deviation of the previous 252 days (standard trading period, might change later) is taken, and the value for that day is calculated with (z = (x - μ) / σ) where z is the normalised value, x the raw value, μ the mean, and σ the stdev. This value tells you how many stdevs the value is from the mean. This means all data is normalised, where before jobless claims are in thousands, CPI is in percentage, VIX up to 80 etc, z-scoring removes this. Also, since the focus is on detecting regime changes, data must be contextualised - for example: 'high volatility' carries less value than 'volatility higher than the 252 day previous rolling average'. On consideration, CPI inflation will use a 1260 day window, as 252 days is insufficient - persistent high inflation over 2 years is plausible, using a small window would completely hide this signal over time, hence a 5 year window is probably better. Also, as CPI data is collected monthly, a longer window is sensible to match the lower frequency. The yield spread may pose a similar problem, but changing to a longer window would blunt the signal from an inversion, taking much longer to react so is not a good idea. Also, yield spread has no fixed target (like inflation has 2%), so what counts as 'normal' can change with rate cycles.
